# Connectedness


## Death

I am struck by the difference between the death of Ivan Ilyich (Leo Tolstoy) and the death of Socrates (Plato - Euthyphro, Apology, Crito, Phaedo). Ivan prioritized his career and status. He ignored his relationship with his family, and only made formal bonds with his coworkers. Upon his death, the first thing that preoccupied his coworkers was to find ways to promote their relatives up the chain of status in order to fill the newly open positions. They were glad that he died and opened up these positions. With regards to the death of Ivan, they were bothered by the fact that now they have to go through the formalities and attend his funeral. His family despised him and the only interest of the widow was to squeeze the largest amount of money she could squeeze from his death. Ivan Ilych himself, had an awful time before his death, truly afraid of that which awaited him. He was deeply tormented by his awareness of the fact that he was going to die.

Socrates, in contrast, welcomed his death. He had the opportunity to avoid it but chose not to. He slept soundly during the nights before his death. During the time he awaited his execution he endeavored to pursue the beauty of poetry peacefully. He had many friends there with him, all trying to save him in one way or another, horrified of losing their friend, they were even ready to sacrifice all their wealth and status and put themselves and their families in danger in order to save Socrates. He drank the poison willingly and his last words were "Crito, we owe a cock to Asclepius", which was what people did to thank the god of medicine for curing them.


## Life

Ivan lived a life intensely focused on his status, on his career and on culmulating wealth. Upon his death, he was relieved of all of those. He took with him neither his position in the society (from which he was quickly replaced), nor his status (people dreaded the thought of having to waste time attending his funeral), nor his wealth. By contrast, Socrates focused on neither of those. In fact, Scorates excessively neglected and sacrified those aspects of his life. Socrates, in return, focused solely on his characther. And his characther still endures today, 2500 years later, through the writings of Plato, and through the living spirit of the Academy and the western thought which rely on Socrates as their foundation. His character continues still to this day to educate people and guide them towards the love of wisdom (philosophy). His character is still alive and flourishing, studied, loved and manifested by thousands of people.


## Meaning

Asking "What is the meaning of life?" is assumming that meaning is an objective property, i.e. a property of the object in cause, a property life. Similar to how asking "What is the height of that bridge?" places "height" as a property of the "bridge". However, meaning is not a property of objects. An object is not in itself meaningful in any way. A clay tablet from 5000 years ago laying on the ground is a pricelss artefact for an archeologist, but to a shepard just passing by it may just be a piece of dirty clay he stumbled his foot upon, cursing and kicking it in rage. Getting on top of a mountain may be meaningful to some people but not to others. Meaning is not an objective property, meaning is not a property of objects. Nor is it subjective, a property of the subjects. A subject cannot experience meaning regardless of the circumstances. Meaning is neither subjective nor objective, but transjective. Some people find some things meaningful at some place in time. Meaning is a property of the relationship between the subject and the object. The relationship between the subject and the object can be meaningful or not. The subject is not meaningful, the object is not meaningful, it is the relationship between the subject and the object that can be meaningful. So meaning is to be found in relationships. There is no meaning of life. There is only meaning in life, in the way you life your life. The way you life your life is your relationship with life. Your relationship with life can be meaningful or not. Meaning is to be found in relationships.

I find these to be one some the core differences between Ivan and Socrates:
1. Ivan focused on external objects (status, wealth) while Socrates focused on the way he lived his life (on his relationship with life). Socrates focused on his character. Socrates had a good relationship with himself, he focused on developing and taking care of himself. He focused on building his character, not on accumulating external objects.
2. Ivan ran away from the his relationship with his family. Ivan kept his work relationship stricly professional. Socrated focused intently on his relationship with the others. He engaged in a neverending pursuit of helping them cultivate their charactes. He stopped by anytime he had the chance (Lysis, Laches), even after just coming from war (Charmides), to talk with his friends and help them cultivate themselves and to help them investigate themselves (Meno). He has put his life in danger to protect his country during war and to save the life of his friend (Symposium).
3. Ivan cultivated no relationship with something bigger than him. Meanwhile, Socrates spent his entire life preparing himself for death. He engaged himself in a never ending pursuit (Euthyphro) of Wisdom, Justice, Courage and Moderation. He dedicated his life to the love of Wisdom, and to instilling that love in others. He dedicated his life to and was happy to forfeit his life for Justice.

According to the work of Dr. John Vervaeke, these are the saples of meaning in life:
1. Your relationship with yourself. (Was I an asshole my whole life? Do you hate yourself for the kind of person you've been? Have you been the kind of person you wanted to be?)
2. Your relationship with others. (Who will be there waiting by the gates of dawn when I close by eyes for ever?)
3. Your relationship with something which transcends you. Something you would want to exist even if you do not. That could be a child, a form of art, or a greater cause such as the pursuit of Wisdom. (What is something I want to exist even if I don't and how much of a difference do I make to it?)

The question for a meaningful life is not "How can the world serve me better?", "How can I accumulate more wealth? How can I make those people and those experiences please me more?", but rather, a meaningful life is lived by continously asking yourself "How can I be more relevant to myself, to others and to the world at large?" and answering this question in way you live your life, answering this question with your every action.

And there is always someone or something out there relying on you to do something (Viktor Frankl - "Man's search for meaning", "Yes to life, in spite of everything"). There is always someone or something out there that you can love.



## Causal interconnectedness

Consider buying a book. A PhD thesis, the result of 5 years of study and experience, has around 200 citations, each with at an average of 4 authors. That's at least 800 direct contributors. A great book is the result of a lifetime of study and experience. If you trace the ideas back you will quickly get to hundreds of thousands of contributors. But prior work with regards to the ideas presented is not the only contribution society needs to provide in order for that book to exists in its current form. Language has to have been developed in a cross-generation effort involving millions of individuals. The culture which gives the book its context and within which the book is embedded has to have been developed through the interaction of hundreds of millions of people through the ages. The fact that the book is available to you and others in your native language, or that you're able to read it in a foreign language, is again the result of millions of people collaborating, bridging the cultures and languages. In order for the book to physically exist, 

## Biological interconnectedness

We are like the waves which are comprised by the sea. The sea is not there to serve the waves or to fit to the waves' idea of the world, the waves are there to manifest the sea.

Humanity is not here to serve you, to pleasure you or to fit to your model of the world or your exectation. You are here to serve in manifesting humanity.

## Reciprocal Opening and Realizing the Moreness

Let me start by going through a scenario, which, for me, clearly illustrates a way of life which is not meaningful or worth living: engaging in addiction. Imagine a student underperforming in the context of an important exam, because, say, he spent too much time playing video games and not enough time preparing\footnote{Through this statement I do not, by any means, want to imply that one should not play video games, or that video games are bad in general. It is just an example. As far as I understand the matter, games are essential for development. Video games, like most things in life, I think, have both upsides and downsides which have to be taken into account.}. Our student then, overwhelmed, tells himself that he is not as good as he thought he was and might address himself with harsh, dichotomic statements such as "I am stupid!" or "I am a loser, I am not as good as the other students and I will never be, because I'm stupid". Such statements inevitably lead to a decrease in confidence and an increase in negative emotion. In turn, the increased supply of anxiety will hinder the student's performance during the next exam. This performance decrease subsequently leads to harsher self-loathing thoughts, leading to increased anxiety, leading to a more hindered performance, leading to even harsher self-denigrating thoughts. And the cycle continues. On and on. A downward self-reinforcing spiral, such as the one illustrated, is commonly denoted as a parasitic process.

A parasitic process involves negative self-reinforcing behavior between (but not limited to) a person's thoughts, emotions and actions. However, its effects do not concern the individual alone. The parasitic process impacts the individual's outside world as well. For instance, it is commonly the case that, scenarios such as the one I've described above are also coupled with an unhealthy coping mechanism. For instance, a video game addiction to help him evade the stress which is continuously accumulating. His addiction started as a way of suppressing anxiety. As a result of investing in his addiction, he did not have enough time to develop himself in other areas, such as the ones required to be a good student. As such, when he faced the challenges he had neglected, his anxiety started to ramp up, because now, there was even less time for him to develop and prepare accordingly. In turn, the increased anxiety led him to rely on his addiction even more, in order to suppress the mounting negative emotions. As a result of losing more time to his addiction, when faced again with the external world, his anxiety increased even further and he turned to his addiction even more and the cycle continued. In some cases, the external world might really collapse on him. He might lose a good job opportunity he needed, or even his current job or a partner. The individual becomes more and more restricted to his addiction, while the world outside becomes more and more narrow around him as the amount of goals he can pursue steadily declines. This process is commonly known as reciprocal narrowing.

This downward spiral in which your thoughts, emotions, actions and outside world drag each other down on a constant basis, endlessly, breaking apart further and further, a little more every time, is the exact opposite of what a meaningful life is. Now, you might ask yourself "What is the cause of this? What was the starting point?". Because a parasitic process coupled with reciprocal narrowing involves so many aspects of one's life, sometimes most, sometimes all, there is no single point of failure\footnote{Though there may be a single original starting point}. There is not a single problem which needs to be solved. Everything falls apart. And there is no single point upon which you can act to make things better. You have to address all points simultaneously in order to rectify those processes. However, if there is a downward spiral, there is also an upward spiral. This is the good news. The key point is again, addressing all the levels (physical, emotional, mental and social) simultaneously.

Consider again an individual. Say he looks for a craft to pursue, but you can generalize this example to any other aspect of life, not just work. Now, when looking for a craft, he considers multiple aspects. One of them would be his knowledge about the craft. He doesn't have to be the best, he doesn't even have to be good, but he has some knowledge about what the craft is about. Enough to get him started and enough to give him a general idea about whether he might be able to pursue that craft or not. When choosing the craft he also considers whether or not he is passionate about the craft. He doesn't have to be in love with it, not even remotely. He just has to like it enough not to hate his life while performing the craft. Ideally, he should like it enough such that he enjoys engaging with the craft for its own sake, and not in order to gain something out of it. Now, you don't want to choose a craft about which you are extremely knowledgeable, but which makes you vomit in your mouth each morning you have to wake up and do it. You also don't want to choose a craft about which you are extremely passionate, but for which you don't have the physical or mental skills required to practice it. The same goes for all the aspects. Do not go for 10/10 in one area and 1/10 in another. 6/10 in one area and 6/10 in another is preferable to 10/10 in one area and 1/10 in another. However, in modern times, with the current opportunities, it is very often the case that people can find crafts with 8/10 in one area and 8/10 in the other. Aside from understanding the craft and enjoying it, there is also having the practical abilities required to perform the skill, and the need for a community. Again, you don't have to be great with regards to your practical skills, and the community does not have to be large. You need enough practical skills to get you started and to allow you to develop and enough of a community such that you can learn from someone and enough people in the community that rely on your craft such that you can actually make a contribution.

Now, because he is part of a community, he was able to learn from them a bit more about the craft. Because he learned a bit more about the craft, he was able to implement some projects, mediocre ones, but nevertheless, a good work's product. Because we was able to implement those projects, he got a taste for the craft and started enjoying it more than he did initially. Because he loved the craft more, he dedicated more time and effort to his craft, and he became more proficient. The skills resulted from his hard work eventually enabled him to contribute back to the community. His community, in turn, aided him even more. And the cycle continued. He was eventually able to sustain himself, to earn a living, not a great one, but a living nonetheless, through his crafting. And he continued professing. Of course, sometimes he would get stuck and run out of ideas. But he would ask the community for help and they provided him with inspiration. Of course, sometimes, his project would not succeed, but that did not stop him from practicing, because he loved practicing the craft, he didn't do it for glory or fame. Once you get the cycle going, if one if the aspects fail, the others are there to support it.

He eventually became knowledgeable in his craft. As he was knowledgeable in his craft, he was able to bring some of his ideas to light (i.e. implement them with great success) and enjoy the fruits of his effort. This enjoyment he got led him to fall in love with his profession. In turn, by virtue of loving his occupation, he devoted more effort to it, putting in a more qualitative work. On the grounds of tackling more challenging problems, he developed a better understanding of his craft. Subsequently, this newfound grasp on his art led him to love his work even more, which led him to increased perseverance, which led him to increased acumen and the cycle continued. We naturally call this a self-reinforcing ”upward” spiral. Note how there is an attunement, at-one-ment, between his mind, body and emotions.

In addition to benefiting the individual, consider if you may, how such a spiral engaged both the individual and its outside world. As our craftsman became better at his craft, more individuals engaged in collaborating with him. As those opportunities arose and he undertook new projects, he developed new skills. As people became aware of his now increased capability, they looked forward to his collaboration all the more, which in turn, amounted to developing him in his proficiency further while the cycle continued. He, as an individual, broadened himself to the fullest extent while the world around him opened up for him more and more. He and the world around him engaged in what could be called reciprocal opening. Reciprocal opening is right connectedness. Reciprocal opening is where meaning lies. Reciprocal opening is where meaning is to be found and cultivated.

Now imagine constantly engaging in this attunement (at-one-ment) between your physical body, emotions and mind within yourself and together as a whole with the world around. I find this, to be a meaningful life. Namely, the wise cultivation of at-one-ment. This is the conclusion I drew from Dr. John Vervaeke's research\footnote{His conclusion was "the wise cultivation of enlightenment within a mythos". However, I hope that, the way I am going to present this cultivation process throughout this work, will include everything he referred to in his final conclusion.}, based on the latest cognitive science. If you're interested, you can find the core (not the whole) of his argument for this proposal as a 50-part lecture series on Youtube called "Awakening from the meaning Crisis"\footnote{\href{https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLND1JCRq8Vuh3f0P5qjrSdb5eC1ZfZwWJ}{https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLND1JCRq8Vuh3f0P5qjrSdb5eC\\1ZfZwWJ}}.



## Having vs being


> There is no way to Nirvana, Nirvana is the way.
> There is no Nirvana outside of your practice.

> Some people live as if they would never die, and then die as if they never lived.


Having (or getting things, reaching certain outcomes, receving praise, getting the company of other people, living to a certain standard etc.) things is dependent on many external factors and it is outside of one’s control. Say you are seeking (to have) your mentor's recognition with regards to your effort. If he has a moody day, he might not recognize or care about your effort. The same might happen if you do something in the house and expect the person you are living with to notice. He might be tired, he might not notice. But not because he is a bad person. But because he is a person. He has good days and he has bad days.

People will fail you, but not because they are bad. But because they are people, just like you. You've failed a lot of people too. But it is not only people who will fail you. Everything will. Hiding money under the mattress? Inflation will make sure to rid you of some. Seeking to earn the first prize in a sports competition? Some happenstance might cause you injury and prevent you from competing. You've found your one true love today? A bus might kill her on her way home\footnote{This does not, by any means, imply that someone's death is not a regretful event. It is a very unfortunate event. The point I want to depict throughout this chapter is that, in the case of unfortunate events, being a whiny child is not useful to anyone. Acting responsibly and courageously is the way to go.}. You can generalize those examples to many more. The core point of all of those is that outcomes are not within the control of the individual. Entrusting your happiness to outcomes is like entrusting your happiness to the wind. If it blows to the east, you are happy. If it blows towards the west, you are sad. And, since the wind, and the cosmos, was not designed to please you, this basically means you leave your happiness to chance. Whenever you find yourself to be sad remind yourself that it is because you left your happiness to chance. However, as I see it, things do not stop here. It gets even worse.

Having and desire and inseparable. And desire only makes things worse. You always desire that which is good. And you always desire that which you do not yet posses. When desire sparks in your heart, it is because you think that you are not currently living the good life that you could live. Desiring only implies that the current state is lacking. Desiring only implies that the current state is lacking that which is desired. Desire only implies that the current state is dissatisfactory. The more you desire, the more it means that the state you are seeking is better than the current one. The better the state you are seeking is, the more worthless the current state is. The more you desire, the more it means that the current moment is not worth living. The more you desire the more miserable and neurotic you are in the current moment.

Say you go on a date at a nice restaurant with your girlfriend. And all you can think about is what you're going to do at work tomorrow, because you want that promotion. Because the good life if the life after promotion, you choose\footnote{Even though you may not have the capacity to choose, it may be automatic behavior until you introduce some training in your life in order to be able to be in control of your life.} to think about the promotion instead of enjoying the current event. Even if you are not realizing it, by doing so, by not being fully involved in the current event, you are basically deciding that the current event is not worth living. And you're not living it. You are not living your life. You are deciding that the current moment is not worth living by thinking about the promotion instead of living it. You rip apart an important piece of your life. And that's not the end. Ripping apart a piece of your life is just a small problem. What actually happens is that, after you achieve your promotion, there is another goal to achieve. Another object of desire. And then another. And then another. And then another. And then another. Think about your past. How many moments were there in your life when you did not desire anything. And by always desiring, you always decide that the current moment is not worth living. So you lose your whole life. This is, I think, the meaning of Plato's quote:


> Some people live as if they would never die, and then die as if they have never lived.


We always try to accumulate wealth and fame and status and achievements as if we would never die, but in doing so, we never actually get to live our lives.

The goals which come with having and desire reduce everyone and everything to either a tool or an impediment. You come at odds with everyone and everything that can get in your way. And with regards to what aids, you reduce everyone and everything to their utility with respect to the goal, you reduce them to a tool, you estrange yourself from the world and fail to see things for what they really are. I think there is not a single individual to not have experienced this. Being used as a tool when there was need for you and then treated as an enemy the second you were no longer useful. Don't do that to others. But not only to others, don't do that to yourself. The darkest point is when goals make a slave and an enemy out of you. You work the hell out of yourself for your desires and then you beat yourself up and get mad at yourself for standing between you and your achievement\footnote{By making mistakes along the way or not being able to accomplish your desire.}. And the more neurotic you are, the more your performance is hindered. And then you become even more neurotic. You want to live a happy life? Desire and goals will make sure you never get to. Your desire for happiness will ensure you are never happy.

By defining yourself by your possessions you lose yourself, you are not you, you are your possessions (be it a title, a position, recognition, knowledge or material possessions). In pursuit of those possessions that come and go you destroy the very thing that stays with you: yourself. You bend your will, burn your mind and break your body to get the objects of your desire. You destroy yourself to get something that you are not, that is subject to external factors and can be easily taken away; and in the end, all you have is a broken and estranged self.

There is an anecdote about Diogenes the Cynic I really like:

> While being received in the house of a man who had devoted considerable care to his many possessions, while leaving only himself in utter neglect, Diogenes cleared his throat and looked around him, but instead of choosing a nearby spot, spat directly into the man's face. And when the man grew angry and asked why he had done that, he said that he could see nothing in the house that had been so neglected as its owner. For every wall was adorned with wonderful painting, and there were images of the gods on the floor portrayed in magnificent mosaics, and all the furniture was bright and clean, and the covering and couches were beautifully adorned, leaving their owner as the sole thing there that could be seen to have been neglected; and it is the universal custom in human society to spit in the worst available space.


Two figures really struck me in terms of switching from having to being\footnote{Although these concepts have been present in many traditions for thousands of years, they have been emphasized in psychology using those names, having and being, by Erich Fromm, author of 'To have or to be', 'The art of being' and 'The art of loving'. These modes of being are also referred to in psychological literature as the telic and paratelic modes.}. One is Diogenes, as presented in 'Diogenes the Cynic, Sayings and Anecdotes with Other Popular Moralists'\footnote{But you kind of have to walk through the first 15 lectures of John Vervaeke's Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series in order to understand the Cynic standpoint. John Vervaeke is how I got into and started to understand all of what I'm talking about in this work.}, translated by Robin Hard and published by Oxford Classics. The other is Viktor Frankl, author of Man's search for Meaning.

Being, on the other hand, is fully within your control. If you want to be a loving and caring man, if, at this very moment, you want to act as a caring and loving individual, there is nothing which can stop you. And there never will be. No one can constrain you from being a loving individual. No one can ever hinder you. No one is your enemy. If, at any given instance, you choose to be and act as a loving individual, there is nothing that can stop you. No one can ever stop you from being a moderate man. No one can ever stop you from being a wise man. No one and nothing can ever stop you from acting the way a just man would act in your situation if you chose to. When your happiness comes from what you are rather then what you have, your happiness is fully within your control. There is nothing which can ever disturb your happiness and sense of balance. You will be able to finally find peace and serenity. There are no more desires dragging you left or right. There is just the peace of the current moment.

In the being mode I am I and that is enough, there is no feeling of lack. In another famous anecdote, Alexander the Great\footnote{Who, by the way, was educated by Aristotle} went to visit him. It is said that Alexander respected Diogenes and asked if he could provide the philosopher with anything. To which Diogenes replied: "Yes. Could you please stand a little to the right? You are blocking my sunlight.". Some versions of this story go as far as to say that Alexander stated after this encounter, that if he were not Alexander, he wanted to be Diogenes.

This does not mean I don't do anything. Instead of having a goal, I can choose and focus on a direction. If I like painting, or if I think painting is the best thing to do, I can paint. If I like building, I can build. If I want to participate in a competition, I will train for that. And I'm happy in each moment I do the thing I want to do. If the situation is dire but I'm acting courageously, I'm happy and proud that I've acted in a courageous manner instead of whining. If something unexpected happens, I do my best to learn from it and adapt and I'm happy that I'm actively developing instead of being frightened. Every step is its own achievement. The priority shifts. Instead of focusing on the outcome and constraining the process, I focus on the process (being a painter) and let the outcomes occur as a side effect. Thus, the desire to achieve the outcome is replaced with a determination towards doing your best effort now.

The path to serenity, as upheld in many traditions, is replacing having with being, desire with determination, goals with directions and by defining yourself as yourself not as your possessions. Let me show you how the switch from having to engaging(being) looks like.

There is a great study by Carol Dweck in this regard\footnote{Also presented in lecture 42 of the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series \href{https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H1yDgjQdRHw\&list=PLJHFnvUBDAuF9y4bFTMOp4rQGMN9K3qbK\&index=13}{https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H1yDgjQdRHw\&\\list=PLJHFnvUBDAuF9y4bFTMOp4rQGMN9K3qbK\&index=13}}. The researchers gathered a lot of 4th graders and split them into two groups \footnote{With the control group, which received neither positive nor negative feedback, three. But this group is not relevant here.}. One group was praised for achievements, the other for effort. First, they gave them hard, but solvable, math problems. And while solving the problems, and each individual was praised, those belonging to one group for the achievement, and the others for their effort. Once all the problems were done, the children were asked if they wanted to tackle harder problems. Easy to guess, the children who were praised for their achievements, did not want to tackle harder problems, because they were afraid of failing. At the same time, the children praised for effort were more than eager to tackle harder problems, because harder tasks implied more effort, hence, more praise. They gave both groups the problems anyway. They went through the process of praising the achievement group for achievement and the effort group for effort. And then, they switched back to problems which were at the same level as the ones from the beginning of the test (hard, but solvable). The outcome: the performance of the achievement group degraded \footnote{The first round had problems of the exact same difficulty. They had the potential to solve the problems, but they failed.} compared to the first round, because they were demoralized by the second round, while the performance of the effort group increased. Finally, they made the kids write a letter to someone from another country (someone they will never meet) to tell them about what happened that day. Again, shockingly, 40\% of the achievement group lied about their performance, while the effort group did not. Those are the differences between someone who wants to achieve performance, and someone who is a performer. Between someone who wants to get/achieve/have the problems solved, and someone who is a problem-solver and takes pleasure from being a problem-solver, regardless of the outcomes. The problem-solver for the sake of problem-solving performs better and it is eager to tackle more challenging problems, all while being more content with its current state\footnote{Does not need to lie about it.}.

Both groups went through the same circumstances, yet their journey, development and performance was completely different. It's not what you do that defines you, but how and why you do it.
> When someone made fun of the sage Diogenes, laughing to see a philosopher like him eating cakes, he said, "Philosophers partake of everything, but not in the same way as everyone else"

Imagine a researcher. Research takes years to come to an end. It takes a lot of time to come up with something new, and to show it works, and in some cases, if you're tackling an already tackled problem, to show that it works better than what was before. If you seek to achieve this goal, your internal dialogue at the end of the day will be "Is this better than the previous method? No.". Each and every day, for hundreds of days. "Is this better than the previous method? No.", "Is this better than the previous method? No.", "Is this better than the previous method? No.", "Is this better than the previous method? No.", "Is this better than the previous method? No.", "Is this better than the previous method? No.", on and on. And when it finally becomes better, you get happy for a day, and then there's another research waiting for you, another deadline, other hundreds of days of negative feedback.

I've met many students who fell in the following loop. Imagine being a student and doing research. You try one thing and then you go: "Is this better than the previous method? No.". Then you try another, and then you go: "Is this better than the previous method? No.". Then another, "Is this better than the previous method? No.". A few weeks go by and still no good result. You start to question your capability as a researcher. You start to wonder if you will ever be able to do anything in the current domain. You can already see the teacher disappointed in you. And you get more anxious. Now because you get more anxious, and you're troubled more by your thoughts, your performance degrades. Because your performance decreases, you start to get more anxious, which in turn causes your performance to degrade even further, and then you start to get even more anxious, and so on. The cycle continues until you crash completely.

Now imagine a student who does not aim to please the professors, or publish a paper, or to impress someone or other such things. He does research because he loves doing research. Because it fascinates him to explore and discover new stuff. His thought process will be completely different. "Let's ready this paper. Wow, that paper was awesome, now I understand more about X, I'm really happy about it.". "Yay, I've implemented X into my experiment, I'm really happy I could do that, it is awesome to be able to see what impact it has.". "I've got the results and they seem to have been affected heavily by Z, now I understand that Z has to be taken into account more when introducing X into the experiment, and now I've got an even better understanding of X, this is fascinating.". "Oh, I found this paper on the effects of Z, now I can understand Z better.". "I've read the paper and now I have a better idea with regards to Z and how to use it when X is present as well, I've learned so much from these experiments.".

Guess which one ends up with a paper published?

Imagine those two students trying to lose 10kgs instead. Which one would manage to do it? Imagine those two students in any situation which requires long term effort. Take a scenario, and imagine the two students living through the scenario. Which one do you think will pull off the task in the end? 

The answer is always the same. But this is the thing, if you "live in the being more" to get better results, you're not living in the being mode, you lying to yourself from the having mode. You have to completely drop ever hoping to achieve anything. Set a direction, and walk that direction because you love walking that direction, and let whatever happens happen. Learn from what happens and adjust your course so you're better oriented towards the path you want to walk. And walk the path because you love walking the path.

Buddhists practice the way the Buddha practiced after enlightenment, not before. They do not practice to achieve enlightenment. Their practice is living their life the way an individual who is already enlightened (e.g. the historical Buddha) would. Practice is enlightenment. This is very well caught in the four bodhisattva vows, presented extremely well in Shohaku Okumura's 'Living by vow':

1. Beings are numberless, I vow to free them (all). (i.e. from suffering)
2. Desires are inexhaustible, I vow to extinguish them (all). (desires in the way we discussed above)
3. Dharma-gates are boundless, I vow to wake to them. (Dharma usually, can either refers to the teachings of the Buddha or Reality as such. In this context it refers to the teachings of Reality, which can be understood from many different angles.)
4. The way of the Buddha is (unsurpassable and) unatainable, I vow to attain it. (Alternative translation: the way of the Buddha is inexhaustible, I vow to see it through.)

These goals are by definitions unrealizable. "Beings are numberless", so you can never save them all, so you can never reach the end of the vow. But reaching the end of the vow is not the point. The point is waking up to those vows, realizing that this is the best direction towards which to steer your life, your every action, and then to take one step in this direction with each action. Just continue to take one step in this direction. And each step in this direction nourishes you with joy and meaning.

This is similar to the way philosophers knew they could never know the Truth, yet they never ceased to seek it. Similar to how they knew they could never be wise, yet they never ceased to pursue wisdom with each and every step. Hence the name philia (love, friendship) sophia (wisdom). The philosopher is never to be wise, he is ever to be a lover of wisdom.


## Duty

Pursue meaningful actions instead of results.

Desire is a contract with yourself to be miserable until the object of your desire is achieved. Expectation is a contract with yourself to be miserable from now on because your expectations have not been met. Learn to just sit with yourself without desire or expectations.
